---
layout: post
title:  "Privacy: A Commodity of the Internet Age"
description: We have a morally acceptable amount of privacy in today’s interconnected world, we opt-in for services that diminish our privacy to increase convenience, public places are still public, and though the system may not be perfect there are ways to increase your privacy.
date:   2015-06-08
categories: internet privacy
img: technology.jpg
author: Steven Croft
---
The internet allows for a rapid exchange of information across a wide variety of mediums and in a global way. Some argue that the proclivity of information sharing encroaches on their personal privacy and is immoral. This is not the case. We have a morally acceptable amount of privacy in today’s interconnected world, we opt-in for services that diminish our privacy to increase convenience, public places are still public, and though the system may not be perfect there are ways to increase your privacy.

In today’s society the services that we choose to participate in do decrease our amount of privacy but we choose to take part in them in order to increase convenience. This has been the case for many years even before the days of the internet. A great example is illustrated by companies and how they did, and do, acquire information about their customers. Before the internet companies would gain insight by asking their customers to take surveys (Johnson, 85). The customer could choose to take the survey or not and that would provide the company with information about the person and what they had purchased. The survey taker relinquishes some privacy in order to provide a better shopping experience for themselves and others and may even receive benefits like coupons for their time. The same process happens online, the company enables cookies on their website that track where the user has clicked and what they have looked at. Cookies are a survey that the user is participating in and can opt-out of if they wish. Disabling cookies in a web browser is a way of saying no thank you when a company asks you to give up some of your private information to them. Allowing the cookies may provide a better shopping experience with a dynamic website that floats items you are most interested in to the top. However this process is optional just as it was before the internet age.

Transaction generated information is a new form of information that is only available because of our interconnected electronic lifestyles (Johnson, 85). This type of information is gathered every time a user uses their credit or debit card, an electronic form of payment. Now these traces of spending are not used by the company at which the money is spent but rather by the bank that the money is stored at to increase security. This is also an optional service even though it may be much harder not to use than the cookie tracking in the previous example. Cash is still an untraceable way to spend money, though it does have a limited range. Cash cannot be spent online and that is a concession that must be made to increase privacy. However most T.G.I.s are not used maliciously and thus making those compromises to avoid them are not very appealing but, never the less it is possible to opt-out.

Privacy is an important commodity and should not be given out lightly, it is the user’s responsibility to understand the context in which they are allowing someone else or something else to invade their privacy and if it is worth it. Things such as membership cards to grocery and other stores may not be worth the invasion of privacy to some people. It is not well known that the membership cards available at grocery stores which allow the customer a limited range of coupons based on what they buy are actually tracking every purchase you make (Johnson, 88). In exchange for this information the store gives out a small discount. This discount is often available for non-members as well. Is allowing a company to track and monitor how often you attend the store, fill your inbox with coupons that you may not need, and know exactly how often you purchase certain foods worth the 2% off you received for that item? For many this may not be the case, but for some it will be worth it. Some users may choose to give up that privacy and it is their responsibility to understand what takes place during that transaction.

This responsibility extends to the public space, it is the individual’s responsibility to know what they are putting out into the public. Public spaces are, and have always been, public even if the type of space that is considered public has changed with the advent of the internet. One of the examples used by Johnson in her book Computer Ethics is about the public court system and its records (Johnson, 88). In the example she makes the case that without the internet the records of the court cases related to the tenant would not be accessible by the landlords. However the public court system and its records are still public and can be accessed by anyone interested in the case. Thus the landlord could have found out about the prospective tenant’s history even without the database, even though the database made it a lot easier and cheaper to do so. Any action that takes place in a public arena will have consequences and those consequences must be taken into account when the action is performed. This is no different with or without the internet, even if the internet puts more pressure on the actor to consider what may happen with the rapid and wide spread of information.

Now some would say that the internet allows people to gain insight into your life without you willingly giving them permission to, which diminishes the variety of relationships that we may have (Johnson, 92). The main means of acquiring this information is through a user’s social media profile. These profiles are public, the internet is a public good, anything placed on it is for anyone to view should be seen as public. There are options for the user to make the profile private and only allow access to the information by people that they approve. This does not change the types of relationships we have with others just because the internet is available. Before the internet any information about a person that was shouted into a crowded room was available for anyone and that is still the case. This goes back to the responsibility issue, it is the users responsibility to understand what they make public and how others may interpret that information. The public is still public and private information is still the responsibility of the individual to guard against what they make public.

The system in place is not a perfect one and many aspects of how we give up our privacy is not well known but there are ways to increase privacy in this world. Johnson discusses many of these methods at the end of her chapter on privacy in Computer Ethics (Johnson, 106). The number one way she recommends and is the best way to protect an individuals privacy is to seek out and read the privacy notices that are available online and that the user mindlessly clicks through. When the user accepts the terms of service they are often agreeing to give up some amount of privacy to increase convenience or to use the service. These privacy policies are often long and convoluted but we do have access to the largest amount of free knowledge and many can be found in a condensed and user friendly version. Just as in voting, information gathering falls on the user and must be sought after.

Opting-out of third party tracking services ensures that the user is only being tracked by those they have given permission to (Johnson, 106). Almost all tracking is done at the user’s acknowledgement and thus to stop being tracked stop telling others that they can track you. When installing new software choose the custom installation and only choose to install the intended software, not the additional optional software. Do not give out your email address to a company or site that will use it to push advertisements from their sister companies to your inbox. In many cases this option can be deselected so that your email address is only used for the purpose you signed up for.

Many of the online tracking tools are enabled through cookies and cookies can be disabled or the browser can alert the user to when a cookie is being used. Blocking them is another way to increase privacy (Johnson, 106). By blocking cookies you are opting-out of the “survey” that the website is constantly taking as you browse the site. Increasing your privacy is often just choosing not to give it up.

If an individual values privacy than there is a morally acceptable level of privacy in today’s society for many of the privacy invasions are allowed by the individual and public places continue to be public. This system is not perfect but if privacy is important there are many ways a person can increase their level of privacy. The increase of available information does not need to be your own personal information.

Works Cited

Johnson, Deborah G. Computer Ethics. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1985. 81-108. Print.